Q&A - Hands in the Sea, 2nd Edition

== General Rules questions
Q: Does a 0-strength elepant contribute to cavalry superiority?
A: No. Cavalry superiority is based on combat strength points, not the number of cards.
R: 5.2.3 - Resolving a Land Battle, under "Battle Losses and Cavalry Superiority".

Q: Do I have to play a card to move a fleet?
A: No, it only requires an action.
R: 5.6.1 - Sea Move.

Q: What card, if any, must be played to start the naval combat? Or is the declaration sufficient in itself?
A: You must play a card with a ship symbol to initiate naval combat.
R: 5.2.5 - Engage Enemy Fleet.

Q: If I play a card on my opponent's turn, e.g. block a raid, what happens to the card?
A: It's discarded.
R: 5.2.4 - Cavalry Raid, where the options for the opposing player are discussed.

Q: Can you block a raid if the location being raided is out of supply?
A: Yes, but not with its location card.
R: 5.2.4 - Cavalry Raid, in the "Clarification".

Q: Can you raid through enemy locations if you use multiple cards?
A: Yes, assuming the locations aren't fortified.
R: 5.2.4 - Cavalry Raid, first paragraph.

Q: Can I move the Roman fleet from Africa to my Home port?
A: Not in a single move. It would normally take 3 actions - first move the fleet to Corsica
   or Sicily, then Italy, and finally into the Roman Home port. The Seamanship strategy card
   could shorten this to two actions if you spend the silver.

   The only way you could move your Roman fleet directly to your Home port from Africa is if
   it's defeated in a naval battle while in the Africa sea zone, although such a retreat is
   neither a move nor an action.
R: 5.6.1 - Sea Move.

Q: Can a fleet harbor at any friendly coastal location?
A: No, any fleet not in its Home port is considered at sea. Note also the clarification on
   naval retreats below.
R: 5.6.1 - Sea Move.

Q: Does a player win when he completes the requisite number of towns, cities, prestige points?
A: No, that's only a game ending condition. Both players should add up VP to determine the winner.
R: 6.2 - Game Ending Conditions.

Q: Is an undefended town or city automatically captured if the owner does not have
   a fortification or defend it with a card?
A: No, all towns have an instrinsic defense strength that the attacker must overcome.
R: 5.2.1 - Attack a Location.

Q: Where do combat losses go?
A: Back to the empire deck, where they would have to be re-purchased.
R: 5.2.3 - Resolving a Land Battle, under Battle Losses and Cavalry Superiority.

Q: If you use a location card in battle, does it return to the discard pile if not lost in battle?
A: Location cards are never lost in battle. They always return to the discard pile after battle.
R: 5.2.3 - Resolving a Land Battle, under Battle Losses and Cavalry Superiority.

Q: Can you examine your discard pile?
A: Yes, your discard pile is public knowledge.

Q: Is my reserve public knowledge?
A: Yes, unless you are playing with the Hidden Reserves optional rule.
R: 5.4.4 - Reserve a Card.

Q: If you use a card during your opponent's turn, do you then start your own
   turn short of a full hand, or do you refresh to your maximum hand size?
A: You start your turn short of cards.

Q: Can a fleet harbor at say, Panormus, Caralis?
A: No. The only harbors are Rome for the Romans, and Carthage for the Carthaginians.
R: 5.6.1 - Sea Move.

Q: Does a fort add + 1 or +2 to the defense?
A: A fort adds +2. This is cumulative with a location's default value of 1, as well
   as any strength modifier, so most locations with a fort would start with a strength
   of 3, while locations like Syracuse or Lilybaeum would start with strength 4.
R: 5.1.3 - Fortify a Location, and 5.2.1, Attack a Location.

Q: Do I gain prestige for winning a battle against a neutral Syracuse?
A: No.
R: 4.5 - Syracuse.

Q: Is Syracuse worth VP at the end of the game?
A: No.
R: 4.5 - Syracuse.

Q: How strong is a neutral Syracuse?
A: A neutral Syracuse starts at strength two, one for the default strength, and one
   because of the strength symbol (sword) there.
R: 4.5 - Syracuse and 5.2.1, Attack a Location.

Q: Can you cavalry raid or pillage a neutral Syracuse?
A: No.
R: 4.5 - Syracuse.

Q: Is it possible to lose prestige points?
A: No.

Q: What is the definition of a mercenary exactly?
A: Any card with the bribe symbol on it is considered a mercenary for game purposes. It
   doesn't necessarily have to have the word "mercenary" on it. In fact, the Carthaginian
   Mercenary General is NOT bribeable! It's the symbol that matters.
R: 2.0 - Game Components, under Game Card Symbols.

Q: Are we allowed to return "S" cards to the Empire deck?
A: Yes, except for the Rome and Carthage location cards.
R: 5.4.3 - Return Card to Empire Deck.

Q: Are cards in the Empire deck face up or face down?
A: Face up.
R: 3.0 - Game Setup, under Place Draw Decks.

Q: How do I reacquire a location card that I sent to the Empire deck?
A: You draft it, assuming that you control the location. You cannot
   draft it if it's neutral.
R: 5.4.1 - Draft an Empire Card.

Q: Can any town be developed into a city?
A: No, only those towns with a colonist symbol, i.e. any town worth 2 or more VP.
R: 5.1.2 - Develop a Location.

Q: Does settling a location after winning a land battle count as an action?
A: No.
R: 5.2.3 - Resolving a Land Battle, under Winning as the Attacker.

Q: Are the dice included within the game meant to serve as a cap?
A: No. If you need more dice, then either find some other dice or record your
   results and re-roll as many dice as needed.

Q: If the attacker has just one sword to bear to the battle, does the battle
   end immediately on the defenders round, the defender as winner?
A: Yes. Don't do that.
R: 5.2.3 Resolving a Land Battle, under Winning as the Defender. Note the
   suggested change below where the Defender may refuse a Prestige point
   if the battle does not last at least 2 rounds.

Q: Is it possible to start a land battle through the sea even if the sea zone
   is occupied by a enemy fleet?
A: Yes, if your fleet is also in the sea zone.
R: 5.2.1 - Attack a Location, under Restrictions on Attacking.

Q: Can you retrieve your reserve during your opponent's turn?
A: No. The only exception to this is the Corvus strategy card, which would let
   the Roman player commit infantry from the reserve.
R: 5.4.5 - Retrieve Your Reserve.

Q: Are capitals considered cities?
A: Yes. Note that they could be reduced to towns via a Cavalry Raid.

== Card Questions
Q: Is Roman Legion I already considered paid for? Or does the Roman player have to
   pay the cost when it's first played.
A: It's already considered paid for.

Q: Does Seamanship affect supply for purposes of VP collection?
A: No.

Q: Do the supply locations Lilybaeum or Syracuse need to trace back to ther capital?
A: No, they are always in supply, i.e. they supply themselves.

Q: Do Roman legions that were committed to a naval battle via Corvus from reserve return
   to the reserve upon victory, or go to the discard pile.
A: To the discard pile or empire deck, depending on the outcome.

Q: Is the effect of a Leaders Quarrel event still in play after it's discarded?
A: Yes, ignore the "this turn" on the event. See the errata below.

Q: When playing the optional (toned down) Storms at Sea event, which one of the two
   does the Seamanship card refer to if there's a Naval Disaster?
A: If you're playing with the optional events, then it refers to the optional
   Storms at Sea event, i.e. lose 1 ship on a 1-4, 2 on a 5-6.

Q: Does Storms at Sea always cause a reshuffle, or only when Corvus is in play?
A: Always.

Q: When using the Administration strategy card's ability to draft 2 cards, can
   I use emergency levy for both cards?
A: Yes, if you can afford it.

Q: Can you use the half-price benefit of the Roman Magistrate in conjunction with
   an Emergency Levy? In other words, pay regular price?
A: No. The drafted card must go in your discard pile.

Q: Do War Elephants count as cavalry for cavalry superiority and combined arms?
A: Yes. Anything with a horse symbol on it does.

== Clarifications, Updates and Suggested Changes from the Designer

=== Clarifications or Errata

* When judging supply for purposes of initiating or reinforcing a battle, the
  attacker need only trace supply to a friendly or neutral location ADJACENT
  to the location being attacked (or to the location under attack itself). The
  defender must still trace supply to the location under attack itself in order
  to reinforce it.

  - Designer's Note: This update primarily affects the situation around the straits
    and Syracuse for the Roman player, clarifying how the Roman player could attack
    Syracuse (which is out of supply range by land) from Catana (which is within the
    two-space supply range across the straits) if Carthage controls the Sicily sea
    zone. But, it could matter elsewhere over the course of the game as well.

* In the Engage Enemy Fleet rules (5.2.5) where the text currently says, "the loser
  of the naval battle must choose to either retreat his Fleet to an adjacent Sea Zone
  that contains a friendly port or send it to his Home Port.", change the words
  "friendly port" to "friendly coastal location".

  - Designer's Note: The phrase "friendly port" there suggested that you could base your
    fleet in locations other than the Home port, which is not the case.

* The effect of the Leader's Quarrel event remains in effect for any battle currently
  in progress where it already applied, even if the turn ends.

  - Designer's Note: I recommend setting the event card next to the battle where its
    effect is applied so that you don't forget.

* For the Bad Omens event, if there are two battles in progress, its effects are only
  applied to the battle where the affected player is the attacker.

* For the alternate Rebellion event, any fortress present is eliminated and returned
  to the pool, same as the regular event.

* For the 25 VP auto victory (aka mercy rule) only the VP's on the VP track are
  considered, not captured towns, prestige points, etc.

=== Suggested Changes
* Add 1 town cube to each player. This should help a little bit with the
  Carthaginian Rush Strategy.

  - Designer's Note: I originally had each player start with 2 more cubes, but
    reduced it at the last minute. Adding 1 more back into the mix should help
    a bit with the Carthaginian rush strategy that's somewhat prominent.

* Make the Pillage track linear, i.e. the opposing player loses 1, 2, 3 or 4 VP
  after the 2nd, 4th, 6th and 8th successful pillage, respectively. The 8th
  successful pillage should be added as a game ending condition.

  - Designer's Note: I was excessively worried about this track being abused,
    especially in conjunction with the Pillaging strategy card, but it never
    materialized in practice. This restores the track to the original implementation.

* Add a 9th Prestige space, changing the game ending condition from 8 to 9.

  - Designer's Note: Some players feel the game ends a bit too early as the result
    of combat, so this should mitigate that without significantly extending the
    playing time.

* You can discard your strategy card as a free action. You may not do this in the
  same round that you purchased a strategy card.

  - Designer's Note: The idea here is to create a bit more churn with the strategy
    cards, since currently things are a bit too stagnant.

* The number of cards you can hold in reserve is equal to the number of developed
  locations you own.

  - Designer's Note: This is already an optional rule in the Companion Guide, but one
    that I think should be incorporated into the core rules since it creates greater
    symmetry between investment in your empire with logistical capabilities.

* The Roman player has the option of starting with the Legion in Reserve.

  - Designer's Note: This is already an optional rule in the Companion Guide. The
    idea here is to slow down the Carthaginian rush strategy a bit.

* The winner of a battle may refuse to take a Prestige point if the battle did not
  last at least 2 rounds.

  - Designer's Note: This is primarily designed to prevent a trick where a player ahead
    on VP will deliberately lose a battle in order to end the game quickly.

* Rule 5.2.3: Under "Winning as the Attacker", immediately after the words "2 or more
  at the start of the attacker's round" add the phrase, "(or after the maximum number
  of rounds have elapsed)".

* Rule 4.4: At the end of the first paragraph under "Straits" after "see Figure 11",
  add "You may not combine a supply path across both a Sea Zone and the Straits".
