
Clarifications, Updates and Errata
February 2024

== Cards

Q: Do you have to pay for the Roman Legion that starts as part of the
   starting Roman deck when you first play it?
A: No, it was already paid for. You only purchase cards from the Empire deck.

Q: What is the definition of a mercenary? Do they have the word "mercenary" on them?
A: Not necessarily. Any card with the "bribe coin" symbol on it is a mercenary.

Q: Does the Leaders Quarrel stay in effect even after a Campaign Card has resolved?
A: Yes. Its effect continues until the affected player's battle/siege is finished.

Q: When drawing the Bad Omens event, does it affect battles initiated by the opponent?
A: It can affect any battle in progress. If there are two battles going on simultaneously,
   then it modifies the battle where the affected player is the attacker.

Q: If you use a card during your opponent's turn (e.g., during a battle or blocking a raid, etc)
   do you refresh your hand to 5 before your turn or do you start your turn short of cards?
A: You start your turn short of cards.

Q: Do you always reshuffle Storms at Sea or only if Corvus is in play? 
A: It's always reshuffled.

== General

Q: Do you have to play a card to move your fleet?
A: No, you only need a warship to engage in combat or raid.

Q: Can a fleet harbor at a specific port besides the capitals?
A: No, the only ports are Rome and Carthage.

Q: Does a fort add +1 or +2 to the defense?
A: A fort adds +2. This is cumulative with any defense modifier.

Q: Can any town be developed into a city?
A: No, only towns with a colonist symbol.

Q: Are you limited by the number of dice included in the game?
A: No, they are not meant as a hard limit. Use additional dice if necessary.

== Victory

Q: Does a player win if he completes the requisite number of towns, cities, etc?
A: No, the only automatic victory is capture of your opponent's capital. Otherwise,
   you count points. Those are simply game-ending conditions, they don't guarantee victory.

Q: Do you gain prestige for conquering a neutral Syracuse?
A: No.

== Battle

Q: Where do losses go?
A: To the Empire deck. If you want them back, you'll have to re-purchase them.

== Raids

Q: Can you raid a neutral Syracuse?
A: No.

== Supply

Q: How does supply tracing work for the attacker?
A: When tracing supply by land to a location under attack, the attacker
need only trace supply to a friendly or neutral area adjacent to the
area under attack. The defender must trace to the actual location under
attack, not just to an adjacent location.

Q: Can I trace supply mixing both land and sea?
A: Normally yes, though you may not combine a supply path across both a Sea Zone
   and the Straits.

Q: Is a besieged Lilybaeum still in supply?
A: Yes, a supply point always supplies itself. 
